Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: breathing systems.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is the function of an anaesthetic breathing system,
and how are these systems classified?
An anaesthetic breathing system, or circuit,
is the assembly of components that conveys the fresh gas mixture from the
anaesthetic machine to the patient, delivers it for inspiration,
carries away expired gas, and allows both spontaneous and controlled ventilation,
while ideally conserving heat and moisture and allowing the elimination of carbon
dioxide.
Its function is therefore to connect the patient to the fresh gas supply for the
delivery of anaesthesia and respiratory support.
An ideal breathing system would deliver the intended gas mixture accurately,
eliminate carbon dioxide efficiently, impose minimal resistance and dead space,
conserve heat and moisture, permit spontaneous and controlled ventilation,
be economical in fresh gas, and be lightweight, convenient and safe.
No single system achieves all these perfectly,
so several designs exist with different compromises.
Breathing systems are broadly classified into two groups.
The first comprises systems without carbon dioxide absorption,
in which carbon dioxide is eliminated by being washed out with an adequate fresh
gas flow; these include the Mapleson systems, classified A to F,
whose efficiency depends on the configuration and on whether ventilation is
spontaneous or controlled.
The second comprises systems with carbon dioxide absorption,
the circle system being the principal example,
in which expired carbon dioxide is chemically absorbed,
allowing low fresh gas flows and the rebreathing of other gases.
The choice depends on the clinical situation,
the economy desired and the conservation of heat and moisture.
So the breathing system connects the patient to the fresh gas supply for the
delivery of anaesthesia and ventilation,
ideally eliminating carbon dioxide with minimal resistance and dead space while
conserving heat and moisture, and is classified into systems without absorption,
the Mapleson A to F systems relying on fresh gas flow, and systems with absorption,
chiefly the circle system.
Describe the Mapleson classification and the components common to these systems.
The Mapleson classification is the standard scheme for the breathing systems that
lack carbon dioxide absorption, categorising them by the arrangement of their
components, which determines their efficiency,
and understanding it allows the rational choice and use of these systems.
The systems, designated A to F, are composed of a common set of components arranged
differently: a fresh gas inlet delivering gas from the machine;
lengths of corrugated tubing acting as a conduit and, importantly, as a reservoir;
a reservoir bag that accommodates the fluctuating flow of breathing and allows
manual ventilation; an adjustable pressure-limiting valve,
the expiratory or APL valve, through which excess gas and expired gas escape and
which controls pressure during manual ventilation; and the patient connection.
The defining difference between the Mapleson systems is the relative position of
the fresh gas inlet and the expiratory valve in relation to the patient and the
reservoir, which determines how efficiently fresh gas flushes out carbon dioxide
and therefore the fresh gas flow required to prevent rebreathing — and this
efficiency differs between spontaneous and controlled ventilation.
The systems differ correspondingly in their suitability:
some are efficient for spontaneous ventilation, others for controlled ventilation.
The classification thus links the physical arrangement of the components to the
functional efficiency, the key practical consequence being the fresh gas flow
needed to avoid rebreathing of carbon dioxide.
So the Mapleson classification categorises the non-absorbing breathing systems A to
F by the arrangement of their common components — fresh gas inlet,
corrugated tubing, reservoir bag, expiratory valve and patient connection — the
relative positions of the fresh gas inlet and expiratory valve determining the
efficiency of carbon dioxide elimination and so the fresh gas flow required,
which differs between spontaneous and controlled ventilation.
Discuss the Mapleson A system and its efficiency.
The Mapleson A system, of which the Magill and the coaxial Lack are the practical
forms, is the most efficient of the Mapleson systems for spontaneous ventilation,
and understanding why illustrates the principle linking configuration to efficiency.
In the Mapleson A, the fresh gas inlet is at the machine end,
near the reservoir bag, and the expiratory valve is at the patient end,
near the patient; fresh gas flows along the corrugated tube towards the patient,
and the expiratory valve, at the patient end, vents gas.
During spontaneous ventilation, the system is highly efficient because of the
sequence of events in the breathing cycle: during expiration,
the first gas exhaled is the dead-space gas, which contains no carbon dioxide,
followed by the alveolar gas; as fresh gas continues to flow in,
it fills the tubing and bag, and the rising pressure opens the expiratory valve at
the patient end, venting the carbon-dioxide-rich alveolar gas.
Provided the fresh gas flow at least equals the patient's alveolar ventilation,
the alveolar gas is vented and only fresh and dead-space gas is rebreathed,
so rebreathing of carbon dioxide is prevented at a fresh gas flow approximating the
alveolar minute ventilation — economical for spontaneous breathing.
However, during controlled ventilation the Mapleson A becomes inefficient,
requiring a very high fresh gas flow,
because the dynamics of valve opening during the controlled cycle vent fresh rather
than alveolar gas; it is therefore not used for controlled ventilation.
The Lack system is a coaxial or parallel version that places the valve conveniently
at the machine end.
So the Mapleson A, in its Magill and Lack forms,
is the most efficient system for spontaneous ventilation,
preventing rebreathing at a fresh gas flow about equal to alveolar minute
ventilation by venting alveolar gas through the patient-end valve,
but it is inefficient and not used for controlled ventilation.
Now the Mapleson D system and the Bain circuit.
The Mapleson D system, and its coaxial form the Bain circuit,
is in effect the converse of the Mapleson A,
being efficient for controlled ventilation, and it is widely used,
so its arrangement and efficiency merit description.
In the Mapleson D, the fresh gas inlet is at the patient end,
delivering fresh gas close to the patient,
while the expiratory valve and reservoir bag are at the machine end;
expired gas and fresh gas flow back along the tubing towards the valve.
During controlled ventilation, the Mapleson D is efficient because fresh gas
delivered near the patient is available for the next inspiration,
and during the expiratory pause fresh gas flow flushes the carbon-dioxide-rich gas
down the tube towards the valve, so that with an adequate fresh gas flow and the
dynamics of controlled ventilation, carbon dioxide is washed out efficiently;
the fresh gas flow required to maintain normocarbia during controlled ventilation
is moderate, related to minute ventilation.
During spontaneous ventilation, by contrast, the Mapleson D is inefficient,
requiring a high fresh gas flow to prevent rebreathing — the opposite of the
Mapleson A.
The Bain circuit is the coaxial version of the Mapleson D,
in which the fresh gas is delivered through a narrow inner tube running inside the
corrugated expiratory tube, so that fresh gas emerges at the patient end while
expired gas returns through the outer tube; this is convenient, lightweight,
allows the valve and bag to be at the machine end,
and the outer tube warms the inner fresh gas slightly.
A hazard is disconnection or kinking of the inner tube, increasing dead space,
which must be checked.
So the Mapleson D and its coaxial Bain form deliver fresh gas at the patient end
and are efficient for controlled ventilation at a moderate fresh gas flow,
but inefficient for spontaneous ventilation,
the Bain being a convenient coaxial design whose inner tube integrity must be
checked.
Describe the Mapleson E and F systems and their paediatric use.
The Mapleson E and F systems are the valveless,
low-resistance systems derived from Ayre's T-piece,
and they have a particular and important role in paediatric anaesthesia,
so their features and rationale are worth setting out.
The Mapleson E is essentially Ayre's T-piece:
a simple T-shaped connection with the fresh gas entering at the side,
the patient at one end, and an open expiratory limb of corrugated tubing at the
other, with no valve and no bag.
Its great advantages are the absence of valves,
giving very low resistance to breathing,
and minimal dead space and mechanical complexity,
which historically made it suitable for small children,
in whom the resistance of valves was a significant burden.
The length and volume of the expiratory limb act as a reservoir;
rebreathing is prevented by a fresh gas flow that exceeds the peak inspiratory
flow, conventionally a multiple of the minute ventilation.
The Mapleson F is the Jackson–Rees modification,
which adds an open-ended or valved reservoir bag to the end of the expiratory limb
of the T-piece; this bag allows the reservoir to be visualised for monitoring of
ventilation, allows manual ventilation by occluding and squeezing the bag,
and provides some control, while retaining low resistance.
The Mapleson F was for many years the standard paediatric breathing system,
valued for its low resistance, simplicity and the ability to ventilate and observe
small children.
Modern paediatric practice increasingly uses circle systems with low dead space,
but the T-piece systems remain important and instructive.
So the Mapleson E, Ayre's T-piece, is a valveless, low-resistance,
low-dead-space system, and the Mapleson F, the Jackson–Rees modification,
adds a reservoir bag for monitoring and manual ventilation — both valued in
paediatric anaesthesia for their low resistance,
requiring a fresh gas flow exceeding peak inspiratory flow to prevent rebreathing.
Briefly account for the Mapleson B and C systems.
The Mapleson B and C systems are intermediate configurations that are less commonly
used than the A, D and the T-piece systems,
but a complete account of the classification should describe them and their limited
role.
In the Mapleson B and C systems, the fresh gas inlet and the expiratory valve are
both located near the patient end, close together,
with the reservoir bag and tubing extending away from the patient.
In the Mapleson B, there is a length of tubing acting as a reservoir between the
patient connection and the bag, whereas the Mapleson C,
sometimes called the Waters system in a related form, is more compact,
with the bag close to the patient and little or no tubing.
These systems are of intermediate efficiency for both spontaneous and controlled
ventilation, requiring fresh gas flows greater than the more efficient A or D
systems for the respective modes — roughly one and a half to two times the minute
ventilation — and so are less economical.
They are not used for routine maintenance of anaesthesia.
The Mapleson C system, being compact,
is most often encountered as a simple resuscitation and hand-ventilation device —
the so-called Waters circuit or a similar arrangement kept for emergency manual
ventilation and pre-oxygenation, for instance in recovery or for resuscitation —
where its compactness and simplicity are convenient for short-term use,
accepting its inefficiency and the need for a relatively high fresh gas flow.
So the Mapleson B and C systems place the fresh gas inlet and expiratory valve near
the patient, are of intermediate and relatively poor efficiency requiring higher
fresh gas flows, and are little used for maintenance,
the compact Mapleson C surviving mainly as a simple device for emergency manual
ventilation and pre-oxygenation.
What is rebreathing, and what determines the fresh gas flow needed to prevent it?
Rebreathing, the re-inhalation of previously exhaled gas,
is the central concept governing the function of the non-absorbing breathing
systems, and understanding what it means and what determines the fresh gas flow
needed to control it is essential to using these systems safely.
Rebreathing means that some of the gas a patient inspires has been exhaled on a
previous breath.
It is not in itself necessarily harmful — rebreathing of exhaled gas that has had
its carbon dioxide removed, as in the circle system, is beneficial,
conserving heat, moisture and agent — but rebreathing of carbon-dioxide-containing
alveolar gas, as can occur in a Mapleson system with inadequate fresh gas flow,
causes the inspired carbon dioxide to rise, leading to hypercarbia.
In the Mapleson systems, which have no absorption,
the prevention of carbon dioxide rebreathing depends on washing out the exhaled
alveolar gas with fresh gas before the next inspiration,
so the fresh gas flow must be adequate.
The flow required depends on the system's configuration,
as discussed — the Mapleson A being efficient for spontaneous ventilation at a flow
near alveolar ventilation, the Mapleson D efficient for controlled ventilation —
and on the patient's minute ventilation and breathing pattern.
In general, the more efficient the system for the mode in use,
the lower the fresh gas flow needed;
an inadequate flow allows alveolar gas to be rebreathed and carbon dioxide to
accumulate. Capnography detects rebreathing by showing a raised inspired carbon
dioxide.
So rebreathing is the re-inhalation of exhaled gas,
harmful when it contains carbon dioxide,
and in the non-absorbing Mapleson systems it is prevented by a fresh gas flow
adequate to wash out alveolar gas — the flow required depending on the system's
efficiency for the ventilation mode and on the patient's minute ventilation,
with capnography revealing inadequate flushing.
Describe the circle breathing system and its components.
The circle breathing system is the principal system that incorporates carbon
dioxide absorption, allowing the rebreathing of exhaled gas after its carbon
dioxide has been removed, and it is the most widely used system for maintenance of
anaesthesia, so its components and arrangement are fundamental.
The circle is so called because gas flows around a circular path.
Its components are as follows. There is a fresh gas inlet delivering gas from the
machine.
There are two unidirectional valves — an inspiratory and an expiratory valve — that
ensure gas flows in one direction around the circle,
so that the patient inspires from the inspiratory limb and expires into the
expiratory limb, the valves preventing backflow and ensuring that gas passes
through the absorber.
There is a carbon dioxide absorber containing soda lime,
through which the expired gas passes to have its carbon dioxide removed before
recirculation.
There is a reservoir bag and a connection for the ventilator,
accommodating the volume and allowing manual or mechanical ventilation.
There is an adjustable pressure-limiting valve to vent excess gas and control
pressure.
The two corrugated limbs, inspiratory and expiratory,
connect to the patient via a Y-piece.
The arrangement allows exhaled gas, stripped of carbon dioxide,
to be rebreathed along with fresh gas,
so that the fresh gas flow can be reduced to replace only the gas taken up by the
patient and lost, enabling economical low-flow anaesthesia.
So the circle system circulates gas around a path comprising a fresh gas inlet,
inspiratory and expiratory unidirectional valves ensuring one-way flow through a
soda lime carbon dioxide absorber, a reservoir bag and ventilator connection,
an adjustable pressure-limiting valve,
and two corrugated limbs to a Y-piece at the patient — allowing carbon dioxide to
be absorbed and the remaining gas economically rebreathed.
Explain the chemistry of soda lime and carbon dioxide absorption.
The chemical absorption of carbon dioxide by soda lime is what allows the circle
system to function with low fresh gas flows, and understanding the chemistry,
the indicators of exhaustion, and the by-products is important for safe use.
Soda lime is a granular mixture whose principal constituent is calcium hydroxide,
with smaller amounts of sodium hydroxide and sometimes potassium hydroxide as
activators, together with water and a pH-sensitive indicator dye,
formed into granules of a size that balances the surface area for absorption
against the resistance to gas flow.
The absorption of carbon dioxide is a chemical reaction,
essentially the neutralisation of an acid by a base:
carbon dioxide first dissolves in the water on the granules to form carbonic acid,
which then reacts with the hydroxides to form carbonates — ultimately calcium
carbonate — and water, the reaction releasing heat and water,
which is why the absorber becomes warm and humid in use,
usefully conserving heat and moisture.
The capacity of the soda lime is finite,
and as it becomes exhausted it can no longer absorb carbon dioxide;
exhaustion is signalled by a colour change of the pH-sensitive indicator dye,
which changes colour as the granules become exhausted and more acidic,
and by a rise in inspired carbon dioxide on capnography.
The indicator colour change may partially revert on resting,
so capnography is the reliable monitor.
So soda lime absorbs carbon dioxide by a chemical neutralisation in which carbon
dioxide forms carbonic acid that reacts with calcium and sodium hydroxides to form
carbonates and water, releasing heat and moisture,
its finite capacity signalled by an indicator dye colour change and, reliably,
by rising inspired carbon dioxide on capnography.
What are the hazards associated with soda lime and carbon dioxide absorbers?
While carbon dioxide absorbers are indispensable to the circle system,
the interaction of soda lime with volatile agents and the consequences of its
exhaustion or misuse give rise to several hazards that the anaesthetist must
understand.
The first and most fundamental is exhaustion of the absorbent,
allowing carbon dioxide to be rebreathed and causing hypercarbia,
detected by capnography showing rising inspired carbon dioxide and by the indicator
colour change, and prevented by timely replacement of the soda lime.
The second is the production of toxic by-products from the reaction between
volatile agents and soda lime.
Sevoflurane can react with soda lime, particularly when warm,
to produce a substance known as compound A, which is nephrotoxic in animals,
leading to historical recommendations for minimum fresh gas flows with sevoflurane,
though the clinical significance in humans is debated.
More seriously, desiccated, that is dried-out,
absorbent — soda lime that has been dried by prolonged high gas flows — can react
with volatile agents, especially the older agents and to a lesser extent the
current ones, to produce carbon monoxide, risking carbon monoxide poisoning;
this is prevented by keeping absorbent moist,
turning off gas flows when not in use to avoid drying,
and replacing absorbent that may have desiccated.
Desiccated absorbent reacting with sevoflurane has also caused extreme heat and
even fires. Other hazards include the caustic nature of the granules causing
irritation if dust is inhaled, and the resistance the absorber adds.
Newer absorbents free of the strong hydroxides reduce the toxic by-product risks.
So absorber hazards include exhaustion causing hypercarbia,
the production of compound A from sevoflurane,
and carbon monoxide and extreme heat from desiccated absorbent reacting with agents
— prevented by timely replacement, keeping absorbent moist,
avoiding drying by high flows, monitoring with capnography,
and using newer safer absorbents.
Discuss low-flow anaesthesia and its advantages and requirements.
Low-flow anaesthesia, the use of fresh gas flows substantially below the patient's
minute ventilation in a circle system,
is an economical and increasingly favoured technique,
and understanding its advantages and the safeguards it requires is important.
In a circle system with carbon dioxide absorption,
the fresh gas flow need only replace the oxygen consumed by the patient and the
agent and gas taken up or lost, the remainder of the exhaled gas being recirculated
after carbon dioxide removal; the fresh gas flow can therefore be reduced well
below minute ventilation, to a litre per minute or less,
the exhaled gas being rebreathed.
The advantages are several. There is economy of volatile agent and of medical
gases, reducing cost. There is conservation of heat and moisture,
since the rebreathed gas is warm and humidified by the absorber reaction,
reducing patient heat and water loss.
And there is a reduction in atmospheric pollution and the environmental impact of
anaesthetic gases, since less is vented. The requirements and safeguards are
correspondingly important.
Accurate monitoring is essential: the inspired oxygen concentration must be
measured continuously, because at low flows the inspired oxygen can fall as oxygen
is consumed and as nitrogen or nitrous oxide accumulates, risking hypoxia;
the inspired and end-tidal agent concentration should be monitored,
because the relationship between the vaporiser setting and the delivered
concentration changes at low flows, with a risk of under-dosing;
and capnography monitors carbon dioxide and absorber function.
The technique requires a leak-free circle and attention to denitrogenation and gas
uptake.
So low-flow anaesthesia reduces fresh gas flow below minute ventilation in a circle
system, giving economy of agent and gas, conservation of heat and moisture,
and reduced pollution, but requires careful monitoring of inspired oxygen,
agent concentration and carbon dioxide, and a leak-free system,
to guard against hypoxia and under-dosing.
Finally, draw together the principles of breathing systems as they bear on practice.
Drawing the station together, the breathing system is the essential link between
the anaesthetic machine and the patient,
and understanding the principles of the various systems allows their rational
selection and safe use.
The function of any system is to deliver fresh gas, eliminate carbon dioxide,
allow spontaneous and controlled ventilation,
and ideally conserve heat and moisture with minimal resistance and dead space.
The non-absorbing Mapleson systems eliminate carbon dioxide by washing it out with
fresh gas, their efficiency depending on configuration:
the Mapleson A is efficient for spontaneous ventilation at a flow near alveolar
ventilation, the Mapleson D and its coaxial Bain form efficient for controlled
ventilation, the valveless Mapleson E and F T-piece systems valued in paediatrics
for low resistance, and the B and C of intermediate efficiency,
the compact C surviving for emergency ventilation.
The fresh gas flow needed to prevent harmful carbon dioxide rebreathing depends on
the system's efficiency for the mode in use.
The circle system, by absorbing carbon dioxide in soda lime through a chemical
neutralisation, allows economical rebreathing and low-flow anaesthesia,
conserving heat and moisture, but requires attention to absorber exhaustion and the
hazards of compound A and carbon monoxide from desiccated absorbent,
and low-flow technique demands careful monitoring of oxygen,
agent and carbon dioxide.
So breathing systems unite the physics of gas flow and rebreathing with the
chemistry of carbon dioxide absorption,
and their rational selection and safe use — matching the system to the mode of
ventilation and monitoring their function — are fundamental to the safe delivery of
anaesthesia.
What is the function of the reservoir bag in a breathing system?
The reservoir bag is a deceptively simple but important component of most breathing
systems, serving several functions,
and understanding these illuminates the behaviour of the system as a whole.
Its first function is to act as a reservoir:
the fresh gas flows continuously from the machine,
but the patient breathes intermittently, drawing gas only during inspiration,
so the bag stores gas during expiration and the expiratory pause,
making it available for the higher flow demanded during the next inspiration,
which exceeds the fresh gas flow.
Without this reservoir, the peak inspiratory flow could not be met.
Its second function is to allow manual ventilation: by squeezing the bag,
the anaesthetist can ventilate the patient's lungs and assist or control
ventilation.
Its third function is to provide a visual and tactile monitor of ventilation:
the movement of the bag with each breath indicates spontaneous respiration,
and its feel gives a sense of compliance and of the airway.
A fourth, safety function arises from the bag's distensibility and the law of
Laplace: because the bag is highly compliant,
it limits the maximum pressure that can develop in the system,
since as it distends its wall tension and the pressure it can generate rise only
slowly, so that a standard bag tends to limit the pressure to a safe level even if
gas accumulates, protecting against barotrauma.
The bag is of a standard size appropriate to the patient.
So the reservoir bag stores gas to meet peak inspiratory flow,
allows manual ventilation, provides a visual and tactile monitor of breathing, and,
by its compliance and the law of Laplace,
limits the maximum system pressure as a safety feature.
Describe the adjustable pressure-limiting valve and its use.
The adjustable pressure-limiting valve,
commonly called the APL valve or expiratory valve,
is the controllable valve through which excess and expired gas leaves the breathing
system, and its correct use is fundamental to both spontaneous and manual
ventilation.
The valve is a spring-loaded one-way valve whose opening pressure can be adjusted
by the anaesthetist by turning a control, from fully open to fully closed.
Its function differs with the mode of ventilation.
During spontaneous ventilation, the valve is left fully open,
so that it opens at a low pressure,
allowing expired and excess gas to escape with minimal resistance during expiration
while the system fills with fresh gas;
this prevents the build-up of pressure and allows the patient to breathe freely.
During manual or assisted ventilation,
the anaesthetist partially closes the valve so that it opens only above a chosen
pressure: squeezing the reservoir bag then raises the system pressure enough to
inflate the lungs, the valve venting excess gas and limiting the peak pressure to
the set value, while still allowing control of the inflation.
The degree of closure is adjusted to achieve adequate ventilation without excessive
pressure. The valve also vents the continuous excess of fresh gas over uptake,
the vented gas passing to the scavenging system.
Setting the valve incorrectly — too closed during spontaneous breathing — causes a
dangerous pressure build-up, while too open during manual ventilation prevents
inflation.
So the adjustable pressure-limiting valve vents expired and excess gas at a
pressure set by the anaesthetist: left fully open for low-resistance spontaneous
breathing, and partially closed for manual ventilation to allow lung inflation
while limiting peak pressure, its vented gas passing to scavenging.
Discuss apparatus dead space and the patient connection.
Apparatus dead space is the volume within the breathing system, near the patient,
in which fresh and expired gas mix and rebreathing of the patient's own expired gas
occurs, and minimising it is important, particularly in small patients.
Physiological dead space is the part of each breath that does not take part in gas
exchange; to this the breathing apparatus adds its own dead space — the apparatus
dead space — which is the volume of the system between the patient's airway and the
point at which the inspiratory and expiratory gas streams separate,
typically including the patient connector, any catheter mount,
angle pieces and the part of the Y-piece distal to the point of separation.
Within this volume, the gas exhaled at the end of expiration remains and is
rebreathed at the start of the next inspiration,
effectively increasing the dead space and, if large relative to the tidal volume,
raising the rebreathed carbon dioxide and the work of breathing.
In adults this apparatus dead space is small relative to the tidal volume and of
little consequence, but in infants and small children,
whose tidal volumes are small, even a small apparatus dead space becomes a large
fraction of the tidal volume and can cause significant rebreathing and carbon
dioxide retention; paediatric systems and connectors are therefore designed to
minimise dead space.
The point of separation of the gas streams — at the Y-piece in a circle,
or the valve in a Mapleson system — defines where the apparatus dead space ends.
So apparatus dead space is the volume near the patient where exhaled gas is
rebreathed, added by the connector,
catheter mount and Y-piece beyond the point of gas-stream separation;
small relative to adult tidal volumes but potentially significant in infants,
in whom systems are designed to minimise it.
What determines the resistance of a breathing system?
The resistance that a breathing system offers to the flow of gas adds to the work
of breathing, and understanding what determines it is important,
particularly for spontaneously breathing and small patients in whom added
resistance is least well tolerated.
The resistance of a breathing system arises from its tubing, connectors,
valves and any absorber, and follows the principles of gas flow we have discussed.
For laminar flow, the resistance of a tube is,
by the Hagen-Poiseuille relationship,
proportional to its length and inversely proportional to the fourth power of its
radius, so that narrow connectors and tubing greatly increase resistance,
as do long systems.
At the higher flows and through the constrictions,
bends and valves of a breathing system, flow is often turbulent,
when resistance depends on gas density and rises more steeply with flow.
The components that most add resistance are the unidirectional and APL valves,
the carbon dioxide absorber, narrow connectors such as the tracheal tube and
catheter mount, and any sharp bends; the tracheal tube, being the narrowest point,
is often the dominant resistance, its resistance rising steeply as its diameter
falls, which is why the smallest acceptable reduction in tube size markedly
increases the work of breathing.
The valveless, wide-bore Mapleson E and F systems were favoured in paediatrics
precisely because they minimise resistance.
Excessive resistance increases the work of breathing,
which an anaesthetised or small patient may not sustain,
favouring controlled ventilation.
So breathing-system resistance is determined by the radius and length of the tubing
and connectors, the valves and absorber, and the flow regime,
the narrow tracheal tube often dominating;
high resistance increases the work of breathing,
poorly tolerated by spontaneously breathing and small patients,
and minimised by wide-bore, valveless and short designs.
What is the role of breathing-system filters?
Breathing-system filters are devices placed in the breathing system to reduce the
transmission of microorganisms and particulate matter,
and they have an important role in infection control and, in combined form,
in humidification.
A breathing-system filter is placed,
typically at the patient end of the system or between the system and the patient,
to trap microorganisms — bacteria and viruses — and particles,
reducing the risk of cross-contamination between patients through the anaesthetic
equipment and protecting both the patient from a contaminated system and the system
from the patient.
Filters work by mechanisms including direct interception, inertial impaction and,
for the smallest particles, electrostatic attraction,
using either a pleated hydrophobic membrane or an electrostatically charged felt;
their efficiency at removing organisms is high but not absolute.
Many filters are combined with a heat and moisture exchanger,
forming a heat and moisture exchanging filter,
which both filters and humidifies by recycling the patient's expired heat and
moisture, a convenient single device.
The use of filters allows breathing systems to be reused between patients with
reduced infection risk, the filter being changed between patients while the system
beyond it may be reused for a session according to local policy,
though this practice and its limits are debated and governed by guidelines.
Filters add some dead space and resistance and can become occluded by secretions or
condensate, increasing resistance, which must be watched.
So breathing-system filters trap microorganisms and particles by interception,
impaction and electrostatic attraction,
reducing cross-contamination and allowing systems to be reused with lower infection
risk, often combined with a heat and moisture exchanger for humidification,
while adding some dead space and resistance and risking occlusion.
Describe the to-and-fro absorption system as a contrast to the circle.
The to-and-fro system is an alternative arrangement for carbon dioxide absorption,
now largely historical but instructive as a contrast to the circle system,
exemplified by the Waters canister.
In the to-and-fro system, the carbon dioxide absorber is a canister of soda lime
placed in line between the patient and a reservoir bag,
with the fresh gas entering near the patient;
the patient breathes to and fro through the same canister — inspiring through it
from the bag and expiring back through it into the bag — so that the expired gas
passes through the soda lime in both directions and its carbon dioxide is absorbed.
Unlike the circle, in which gas flows in one direction around a circuit through the
absorber, the to-and-fro system has the gas passing back and forth through a single
canister, with no unidirectional valves.
Its advantages were simplicity, compactness, portability,
and good conservation of heat and moisture, the absorber being close to the patient.
Its disadvantages, which led to its abandonment, were several:
the soda lime canister, being close to the patient and in the breathing path,
added dead space that increased as the soda lime nearest the patient became
exhausted, with a risk of rebreathing;
the horizontal canister allowed channelling of gas and uneven,
inefficient absorption; there was a risk of inhaling alkaline soda lime dust;
and the warm, bulky canister near the patient's face was inconvenient.
So the to-and-fro system places a soda lime canister between the patient and the
reservoir bag, the patient breathing back and forth through it without
unidirectional valves; simple, compact and good at conserving heat and moisture,
but abandoned because of increasing dead space as the absorbent exhausts,
channelling, the risk of dust inhalation and inconvenience — in contrast to the
unidirectional circle.
What newer carbon dioxide absorbents are available, and why?
In response to the hazards associated with traditional soda lime,
particularly the production of toxic by-products through reaction with volatile
agents, newer carbon dioxide absorbents have been developed,
and an awareness of these completes the account of absorption.
The hazards of traditional soda lime arise largely from its content of the strong
alkalis sodium and potassium hydroxide,
which catalyse the degradation of volatile agents:
the reaction of sevoflurane with soda lime to form compound A,
and the reaction of agents with desiccated soda lime to form carbon monoxide and,
with sevoflurane, to generate extreme heat and even fire.
The newer absorbents address this principally by removing or greatly reducing the
strong alkalis.
Absorbents based on calcium hydroxide alone,
with little or no sodium or potassium hydroxide — sometimes with calcium chloride
and humectants to maintain reactivity and moisture — react far less with volatile
agents, producing little or no compound A or carbon monoxide even when desiccated,
and are much less prone to the dangerous heat reaction;
their trade-off is a somewhat lower absorptive capacity,
requiring more frequent replacement.
Lithium hydroxide-based absorbents have also been used, with a high capacity,
in particular settings. These safer absorbents reduce the risks of toxic
by-products and of the desiccation hazards,
though attention to absorber management and capnography remains essential.
So newer carbon dioxide absorbents,
principally those based on calcium hydroxide with the strong sodium and potassium
hydroxides removed, react far less with volatile agents,
producing little compound A or carbon monoxide and avoiding the extreme heat
reaction even when desiccated, at the cost of a somewhat lower capacity — developed
to reduce the toxic-by-product and desiccation hazards of traditional soda lime.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Breathing systems connect the patient to the fresh gas supply,
eliminating carbon dioxide with minimal resistance and dead space while ideally
conserving heat and moisture; they are classified into non-absorbing (Mapleson A-F,
relying on fresh gas flow to wash out carbon dioxide) and absorbing (the circle
system) types.
Second, Among Mapleson systems, configuration determines efficiency:
the Mapleson A (Magill, Lack) is most efficient for SPONTANEOUS ventilation (fresh
gas flow about equal to alveolar ventilation) but poor for controlled;
the Mapleson D and coaxial Bain are efficient for CONTROLLED ventilation but poor
for spontaneous.
Third, The valveless Mapleson E (Ayre's T-piece) and F (Jackson-Rees) are
low-resistance, low-dead-space systems used in paediatrics,
needing a fresh gas flow exceeding peak inspiratory flow;
the compact Mapleson C survives mainly for emergency manual ventilation.
Fourth, The circle system uses two unidirectional valves to drive expired gas
through a soda lime absorber (calcium hydroxide plus activators),
which removes carbon dioxide by chemical neutralisation to carbonates and water
(releasing heat and moisture), allowing economical rebreathing and low-flow
anaesthesia; exhaustion is signalled by indicator colour change and, reliably,
by rising inspired carbon dioxide on capnography.
Fifth, Absorber hazards: exhaustion (hypercarbia), compound A from sevoflurane,
and carbon monoxide/extreme heat from DESICCATED absorbent reacting with agents -
prevented by timely replacement, keeping absorbent moist and avoiding drying by
high flows; low-flow anaesthesia (economy, heat/moisture conservation,
less pollution) requires careful monitoring of inspired oxygen,
agent concentration and carbon dioxide.
Thank you. That concludes the station.